Let's begin our exploration of the AI
fluency framework that is central to our
learning over the rest of this course.
What does it really mean to be fluent
with AI? Why does it matter? We're
living in a fascinating moment of
technological change, one that brings
both excitement and uncertainty.
AI is reshaping how we communicate,
create, learn, and solve problems in
both our work and personal lives. Many
of us now have versatile assistants and
virtual collaborators at our fingertips
that can help with writing,
brainstorming, researching, decision-m,
and much
more. But here's the thing. Having these
powerful systems doesn't automatically
mean we know how to make the most of
them or to engage with them responsibly.
Think about a time when you got an
unexpected response from an AI and you
weren't sure how to proceed. Or when you
struggled to explain exactly what you
needed and left the interaction feeling
frustrated. Or perhaps you've wondered
if the information you're sharing is
being properly
protected. All of these moments
highlight the gaps between simply having
access to AI and truly being fluent with
it. So, how do we move beyond just
knowing a few prompt tricks to
developing a thoughtful and responsible
approach that will continue to serve us
well as AI keeps
evolving? What exactly does AI fluency
look
like? AI fluency isn't just about being
a technical expert or or memorizing the
the 10 best prompts for whatever
trending task is popular this month.
It's about developing a collection of
practical skills, knowledge, insights,
and values that reinforce each other and
adapt as the technology changes. At its
heart, AI fluency means interacting with
AI systems in ways that are effective,
efficient, ethical, and safe. In other
words, really maximizing what you get
out of your interactions with AI without
wasting time and energy and in an honest
and responsible way that protects the
privacy and security of yourself and
others. Through our research and
personal experiences, we found that
there are three main ways people engage
with
AI. Understanding these modes helps us
to see why AI fluency needs to go beyond
simple prompt engineering.
The first way we interact with AI is
through automation, where an AI
assistant completes a specific task
based on your instructions. For example,
you might ask an AI to summarize a
document for you or draft an email or
create an image or plan a trip
itinerary. You define what needs to be
done and the AI executes it. And it
works well when you have a clear outcome
in mind. But it can be challenging when
you're not quite sure yet what you're
actually looking for. The second
approach is
augmentation where you and the AI
assistant collaborate and complete a
task together. The AI isn't treated as a
machine to automate a task. Instead, it
becomes a creative thinking and
problem-solving partner. For example,
imagine you're developing a character
for a story and you're feeling stuck.
You might explore this through a
conversation with the AI assistant,
bouncing ideas back and forth,
elaborating on backstories,
experimenting with dialogue, and
otherwise refining that character. Or
perhaps you're working through a
difficult architectural problem with an
app that you're building. Or maybe
you're trying to formulate your thoughts
on a complex research topic. In these
moments, the AI augments your creativity
and thinking. It doesn't do work for
you, but helps you do your work
better. This approach works best when
solutions aren't straightforward and you
need space to explore and
experiment. The third mode is agency,
where AI works independently on your
behalf. For instance, you might set up
an AI assistant to categorize incoming
emails by topic or urgency and maybe
even begin drafting responses to the
most urgent ones. Or you might create an
everchanging interactive experience for
visitors to your website or power a
dynamically interactive character in a
game. The key idea is that rather than
defining specific actions, you're
establishing the AI's knowledge and
behavior patterns.
You become less like a script writer
giving exact directions and more like a
director setting a vision. None of these
approaches are inherently better than
the others. They serve different
purposes and excel in different
situations. In fact, you might even use
all three in a single project.
While many start with automation, we
found that augmentation and agency are
approaches that really take advantage of
the unique capabilities of AI and that
these modes often lead to the most
creative and effective solutions.
Understanding these differences helps us
recognize that AI isn't just a tool.
It's a technology that can act as a
tool, but also as a medium or as a
partner or co-creator.
and sometimes all of these at once. And
this shift from mere tool to powerful
collaborator gives technology a new role
to play in our creative and problem
solving work. Which means we also have
new roles and need to adapt and develop
new skills. These skills are what we
describe in the AI fluency framework.
Whichever way you engage with AI, there
are four key areas of competence to
develop and master. They form the core
of the AI fluency framework which we'll
explore over the rest of this Of course.