Hello and welcome to our final session

covering the foundations of AI fluency.

I'm Professor Rick Dacen from the

Ringling College of Art and Design. Over

a short period, we've covered quite a

lot of ground together exploring the AI

fluency framework and seeing how it

applies to everyday collaboration with

AI. Let's take a moment to reflect on

what we've learned, highlight some key

takeaways, and look ahead to where you

might go

next. Let's begin by revisiting the four

core competencies, also known as the

four Ds, that make up the AI fluency

framework. Delegation focuses on

deciding what work should be done by and

with AI versus what's best handled by

humans alone. It combines your

understanding of the problem, awareness

of AI capabilities, and skill in

distributing work effectively between

you and your AI

assistants. Description addresses how we

communicate with AI systems. Through

clear articulation of what we want, how

we want it approached, and what kind of

interaction is most helpful to us, also

known as product, process, and

performance description, we guide AI to

produce the outputs we need and become

more effective collaborators and

assistants.

Discernment involves critically

evaluating AI outputs and behaviors. By

developing your ability to assess

outputs, processes, and interactions,

also known as product, process, and

performance discernment, you ensure

quality and appropriateness in all your

AIdriven outputs.

And finally, diligence ensures our AI

interactions are responsible. Through

thoughtful selection of AI systems,

transparency about AI's role in taking

accountability for the final product,

also known as creation, transparency,

and deployment diligence, we can work

with AI ethically and safely. Remember

that these competencies apply across all

three ways we interact with AI.

Automation, where AI performs specific

tasks following your

instructions. Augmentation, where you

and AI collaborate as thinking partners,

and agency, where AI is configured to

act independently on your

behalf. As you move forward in your AI

journey, keep these essential insights

in mind. For delegation, your expertise

and judgment remain the foundation of

effective AI use. The most powerful

outcomes often emerge when you can

identify opportunities where you and AI

can build on each other's strengths

through iterative collaboration,

creating outcomes neither could achieve

alone. For description, clear

communication bridges your intentions

and AI capabilities.

Sometimes the most effective

instructions aren't elaborate prompts,

but thoughtful conversations that

provide context, examples, and

feedback for discernment. Critical

evaluation of AI outputs is a

non-negotiable

responsibility. Your discernment skills

protect against AI limitations and once

again enable you to achieve results

neither you nor the AI could easily

create alone. For diligence, you remain

accountable for what you do with AI and

its impact on others. Being transparent

about AI's role in your work builds

trust and

integrity. These competencies aren't

mastered overnight. They develop through

practice. As you delegate work, describe

your needs, discern the quality of

outputs, and apply diligence to your

process. Your AI fluency will grow

naturally. The goal isn't perfection.

It's about continually developing

awareness, commitment, and intentional

approach to working with AI. The fluency

framework is designed to be widely

applicable to the broad range of

generative AI assistants and remain

relevant even as AI systems continue to

evolve, but it is up to us to make sure

we continue to apply our learning as

well. We hope this course is just the

beginning of your AI fluency journey. To

close out the AI Fluency Foundations

course, you'll find some follow-on

activities designed to help you apply

what you've learned, along with

resources for continued exploration. We

began this course with the goal of

helping you think differently about AI

and the ways we work with it. These are

powerful systems, but they're not silver

bullets or magical solutions to every

problem. They're only as useful and safe

as we enable them to be. So invest in

your own expertise and stay aware of

technological change so that you can

delegate appropriately. Practice art of

description and discernment. That

thoughtful back and forth conversation

that transforms AI from simple

automation machines into genuine

thinking partners. And above all, take

responsibility for the way you work with

AI and what do you create together. Be

effective and efficient. Be ethical and

safe. We're all learning together how to

navigate this rapidly evolving

landscape. Thank you for joining us on

this journey toward greater AI fluency.

The future of human AI collaboration is

bright and you're now better equipped to

shape it thoughtfully.


