In this video, we'll dig deeper into the

AI fluency competency of

discernment. AI fluency means working

with AI effectively, efficiently,

ethically, and

safely. Discernment is specifically

about evaluating AI outputs, processes,

and behaviors. essentially your quality

control system for AI

collaboration. Discernment is your

ability to critically evaluate what AI

produces, how it produces it, and how it

behaves. It's kind of the flip side of

description. If description is about

clearly communicating what you want,

discernment is about deciding whether

what you get back actually meets your

needs. Developing your discernment helps

you identify when AI outputs are

valuable versus problematic. Recognize

strengths and limitations and determine

when outputs are ready to use or need

more work. Doing this well requires both

domain expertise, in other words,

knowing enough to judge quality, and an

understanding of how AI systems work,

including their typical

shortcomings. Remember, even the most

advanced AI systems can make reasoning

errors, produce factual mistakes, or act

in unexpected ways. Your capacity for

discernment acts as an essential

safeguard. The most straightforward form

of discernment is evaluating the quality

of what the AI actually produces. When

reviewing AI generated content, ask

yourself questions like, is this

factually accurate? Is it appropriate

for my audience and purpose? Is it

coherent and well structured? Does it

meet my requirements? And does it add

value or solve the problem I intended?

We call this first concept product

discernment, the ability to judge the

accuracy and value of AI created output.

When interacting with AI, you need to

assess not just what the AI produces,

but how it got there. Some things to

look out for include logical errors,

lapses in the AI's attention, taking

inappropriate steps, getting stuck on

one small detail or interpretation and

being unable to consider any

alternatives, or getting trapped in

circular reasoning. For example, imagine

you're working with AI to expand on one

of five outline options it offered for a

document. After several rounds of back

and forth ideiation together, you notice

elements of rejected ideas being

reinserted by AI. We call this kind of

recognition process discernment, the

ability to judge the quality and

effectiveness of the AI's process. It's

needed to ensure you and the AI are

thinking in sync throughout the process,

guiding the AI towards your vision for

success. It becomes especially important

for complex tasks where the correct

answer isn't immediately obvious. In

these situations, having trust in the

process is

everything. It's also often valuable to

evaluate and guide how the AI behaves

during your interaction. We call this

performance discernment. The difference

between process and performance is maybe

a bit subtle. You can think of process

as the work the AI is doing, while

performance is how well it is

interacting with you while it does the

work. When evaluating an AI assistant's

performance, you can ask yourself, is

there a better way for the AI to

communicate with you for greater ease

and productivity going forward? Is it

providing the information you need in a

helpful way? Does it respond well to

your feedback and direction? And is the

interaction efficient or unnecessarily

complex? For example, is the AI asking

too many questions when you need concise

answers, or is it too brief when you

need comprehensive information? We call

this performance discernment, the

ability to judge the quality of the

human AI interaction, which helps you

shape more productive working engagement

with the AI systems. Of course,

discernment doesn't end with evaluation.

You also need to provide feedback in

order to improve what an AI delivers

going forward. When you identify

problems in AI outputs, effective

feedback includes specifying what the

problem is, clearly explaining why it is

a problem, providing concrete

suggestions for improvement and revising

your instructions or examples. In other

words, when discernment flags a problem,

better description is often the

solution. But this isn't always the

case. Sometimes you may need to rethink

your delegation decisions because you

might be using the wrong tool or

approaching the problem in entirely the

wrong way. To recap, product process and

performance discernment combine to form

the discernment

competency. Discernment works handinand

with description. While description

focuses on communicating your needs to

AI, discernment evaluates how well those

needs were met. Together, they form a

continuous loop of instruction and

evaluation that drives quality. By

developing your discernment skills, you

ensure that your AI collaboration

remains guided by human judgment, a

critical element of truly effective AI

fluency.


