[Music]

Let's explore one of the most practical

skills when working with AI. Crafting

effective prompts. This might sound

technical or complicated, and some

guides certainly make it seem that way,

but at its heart, it's surprisingly

straightforward. Prompting is simply how

we apply this course's description

competency in practice. clearly

communicating what we want, how we want

it done, and how we want to interact

with our AI assistant throughout the

entire process. Think of prompting like

explaining a task to a helpful new

colleague who's eager to assist, but

needs clear directions and expectation

setting to do their best work. We'll be

using Claude throughout this section,

but these tips can be carried over to

many other AI systems. You might have

heard the term prompt engineering tossed

around. Prompt engineering is simply the

practice of designing effective

instructions for AI systems like Claude.

It's about crafting your questions and

providing context in ways that help AI

assistants understand exactly what you

want. What's fascinating is that

effective prompting blends familiar

human communication skills with a few

considerations specific to AI. Many

principles that make for good human

conversation, such as being clear,

providing relevant context, and giving

concrete examples, also apply when

working with AI. Yet, there are

differences, such as being more explicit

about things humans could naturally

infer, and accommodating the AI's

limited context window, and sometimes,

depending on the AI you're working with,

using specific formatting that machines

can easily process. As AI assistants

continue to evolve, prompting best

practices evolve, too. What works with

today's AI systems may be different from

what works with tomorrow's.

Experimentation is key to discovering

what works best for your specific needs.

In this video, we'll mainly explore six

foundational prompting tips that will go

a long way toward helping you

effectively communicate and collaborate

with Claude and other AI systems. They

are give Claude context, show examples

of what good looks like, specify output

constraints, break complex tasks into

steps, ask Claude to think first, and

define Claude's role, style, or tone.

The first principle is simple but

powerful. Be specific and clear about

what you want, why you want it, and

perhaps most surprisingly, who you are.

Let's take a simple prompt. Tell me

about climate change. How can we improve

this by giving Cloud more context? A

more specific contextrich version could

look like, explain three major impacts

of climate change on agriculture in

tropical regions with examples from the

past decade. Our baseline prompt was

vague and leaves clawed guessing about

our interests, level of knowledge, and

the depth of detail we're looking for,

such as geography and time span. We can

even add more context by providing

information not just about what we're

looking for, but why we're asking and

how we'll be using that information that

Claude gives us. Now, our prompt looks

like this. Explain three major impacts

of climate change on agriculture in

tropical regions with examples from the

past decade. I'm preparing for a job

interview at an agricultural research

lab in Indonesia. I have a degree in

ecology, but no specific knowledge on

climate change. write a summary of key

concepts that would help me speak

intelligently in the interview. All this

added context helps tailor Claude's

response to your specific situation and

knowledge level. This kind of background

information is something we naturally

provide in human conversations, but

might forget to include when talking

with Claude. Sometimes showing is better

than telling. Providing examples of the

kind of output you're looking for can be

incredibly effective. This is sometimes

called fshot prompting or nshot

prompting in technical circles where n

is the number of examples given but it's

really just about showing the AI

examples for it to emulate. For

instance, take the following prompt.

Please convert this technical statement

to plain language. The platform

implements end-to-end encryption

protocols to safeguard data integrity.

Clog may already be able to do this to

your satisfaction. So we definitely

recommend you just try first without

examples and see where it leads you. But

let's say you have a very specific style

you want Claude to follow, and it's

harder to explain than to give examples.

Your refreshed prompt could look

something like this. Here are two

examples of how to convert technical

jargon into plain language. Original,

the quantum algorithm exhibits quadratic

speed up. Plain, the new method solves

problems roughly twice as fast as

previous methods. Original, the

interface leverages intuitive design

paradigms. Plain, the design is easy to

understand and use. Now, please convert

this complex technical manual to plain

language. When providing examples, aim

to cover the full diversity of possible

prompts, such as examples that cover

different cases or styles. This helps

Claude better understand the broad range

of the pattern you want it to follow.

Being clear about output constraints,

such as the desired format and length of

Claude's response, or the language you

want Claude to code in, or the color of

the buttons on the web page you want

Claude to design, also helps ensure you

get exactly what you need. Here's an

example of clear and detailed

description to ensure Claude delivers

exactly what you're looking for. Create

a clean, modern, single page art

portfolio website. Include these main

sections: hero, about me, skills,

portfolio, projects, experience, and

contact. Make the navigation menu sticky

and responsive with hamburger menu on

mobile. Use a sunset color palette and

add a dark light mode toggle in the

navigation. Guidance like this helps

cloud structure its response to match

your expectations. When you have a

complicated request, breaking it down

into smaller steps helps Cloud follow

your thinking and deliver better

results. Think about it this way. If you

ask a friend to do something for you

without specifying how, there's a chance

that they may not do it the way you

intended them to. We've all been there.

Listing out task steps ensures that

Claude follows the process you want to

in order to accomplish its task. This is

sometimes called chain of thought

prompting. For example, instead of

asking Claude to analyze this quarterly

sales data, you might say, "I'd like to

analyze this quarterly sales data.

Please approach this by looking through

our sales records to identify the top

performing products, comparing current

quarter results to the previous quarter,

highlighting any unusual trends or

patterns, and then suggesting possible

reasons for these trends. By default,

you may not need to do this, especially

for tasks that are relatively

straightforward. Furthermore, modern

reasoning models or extended thinking

models are increasingly capable of

performing step-by-step reasoning on

their own, but you can still guide this

process to ensure it aligns with your

needs. The more variance there is in

ways to execute the task well, or the

more that proper task execution relies

on experience and knowledge you've

gained as a domain expert, the more you

should consider taking the time to

translate that knowledge into Claude.

Relatedly, sometimes it can be helpful

to explicitly give AI assistants like

Claude space to work through its process

first before executing its task. This

approach helps Claude produce more

thorough and well-considered responses.

For example, you can add this to your

prompt. Before answering, please think

through this problem carefully. Consider

the different factors involved,

potential constraints, and various

approaches before recommending the best

solution. As I mentioned, modern

reasoning or extended thinking models by

default think before acting. But if

you're working with an AI assistant that

does not think first by default, you can

still prompt the AI to do so. I want to

note the importance of giving the AI

assistant space to think before doing

its task, not after. If you want that

thinking to increase the quality of the

AI's work, just like how having space to

think before you act is different than

acting first, then being asked to

explain your thinking afterwards. As a

side benefit, this also allows you to

better see where the AI assistant might

be going astray and thus where you could

hone your description competency further

by providing more guidance. Specifying

how you want cloud to communicate and

behave can significantly change how it

approaches a task. By specifying the

level of expected expertise, the

perspective you want it to take, or its

communication style, you can guide both

Claude's interaction with you and the

final result of what it produces. Simply

put, who do you want the AI to act as?

For example, take this prompt. Please

explain how rainbows form from the

perspective of an experienced science

teacher speaking to a bright 10-year-old

who's interested in science. This is

also a good way to brainstorm or get

feedback. You can specify a general role

or even ask Claw to take on the persona

of a specific figure, such as Richard

Fineman, when asking for physics

explanations. Here's another example. As

a UX design expert, review this website

wireframe and suggest three improvements

focusing on user navigation and

accessibility. Perhaps the most powerful

technique is asking Claude to help

improve your prompt. When you're not

sure how to ask for something or how to

improve your prompt, describe to Claude

your issue or situation and ask it to

make your prompt better or write your

prompt for you. I'm trying to get you,

Claude, to help me with goal. I'm not

sure how to phrase my request to get the

best results. Can you help me craft an

effective prompt for this? Here's where

Claude and other AI assistants may vary

most in terms of performance. So, we

suggest you experiment with different

models as part of practicing delegation.

Effective prompting is iterative and

experimental. AI systems and best

practices are constantly evolving. So,

what works today may change tomorrow.

Your first attempt won't always yield

the perfect result, and that's expected.

When a response isn't quite what you

need, try refining your approach by

playing around with any of the

techniques we mentioned, such as add

more specificity or context. Provide

examples of your desired output. Break

the task into smaller steps and try a

different technique or combination of

techniques. You can also ask for

variations such as, "Can you give me

three different versions of this?" You

can request different formats such as,

"Instead of a paragraph, could you

present this in an interactive

artifact?" Note that artifacts are a

unique way that Claude can create

outputs that may be easier to understand

or more interesting to digest. You can

also check confidence, such as for

factual questions, you can ask, "How

confident are you about this answer?"

You can also reset the conversation

entirely. Sometimes starting a fresh

conversation gives better results than

trying to correct the conversation

that's gone off track. Use each

interaction as feedback to improve your

next prompt. Over time, you'll develop

an intuition for how to communicate

effectively with all AI systems. As you

apply these techniques in practice,

here's some guidance to recap. Some

patterns consistently work well.

Starting with a clear task overview

statement, including format

specifications and examples, setting

explicit constraints or requirements,

providing rich and relevant background

information, and common mistakes to

avoid are assuming that Claude can read

your mind, or overloading a single

prompt or conversation with multiple

unrelated tasks, being too vague about

what success looks like, and not

providing feedback on previous

responses. To recap, effective

communication with AI systems like

Claude combines timeless human

communication principles with AI

specific techniques. The approaches

we've covered will serve you well across

different AI systems. These six

principles together with the secret

weapon of asking Cloud for help form a

solid toolkit for applying the

description competence to your AI

interactions. Iteration and practice

here is the key to Swift improvement and

mastery. Remember that prompt

engineering is an evolving practice. As

models improve, some specific techniques

become less necessary. However, these

principles of good communication are

still relevant even if the way we apply

them changes. Maintain a spirit of

experimentation and adapt your approach

based on your results.


