Let's now examine what generative AI can

and cannot do. Focusing on LLM such as

Claude, think of this as getting to know

a new colleague. Understanding their

strengths and limitations help you

collaborate more effectively. To start,

we'll focus on what these systems do

remarkably well. You might be amazed at

how versatile modern language models can

be. They're skilled with language in

ways that seemed impossible just a few

years ago. Crafting emails that capture

your voice, condensing lengthy reports

into clear summaries, translating

between languages, and explaining

complex topics across countless fields

from microbiology to marketing strategy.

What's particularly notable is how these

models can shift between different tasks

without needing additional training. The

very same system that helps you write

poetry or brainstorm ideas for your

birthday party can turn around and help

you understand quantum computing

concepts or analyze quarterly business

trends all through simple conversation.

These models can also maintain the

thread of a

conversation, remembering what you

discussed earlier and building upon it.

If you mention your project deadline in

passing, for example, and refer back to

it later within the conversation, the AI

typically understands what you're

talking about, much like a human

conversation partner would. Many modern

LLMs can now also reach beyond their own

knowledge by connecting to external

tools and information sources, allowing

them to search the web, process files,

or even use other applications to

enhance their

capabilities. This dramatically expands

what they can help with. However, just

like any technology, LLMs as exist today

also have certain

limitations. First, AI models are

bounded by their training data. LLMs

have a knowledge cutoff date based on

when they were trained, the point after

which they have no innate knowledge of

the world. For example, a model with a

cut off date of November 2024 means that

it wasn't trained on any data after

November

2024. Imagine someone who went into a

retreat without internet access at a

specific date. They wouldn't know about

events that happened after they left.

Models need tools like web search to

learn more about recent

developments. Additionally, the training

process doesn't verify every fact in the

training data. This means models can

sometimes learn and reproduce

inaccuracies that were present in their

training data. They can also make

mistakes when trying to piece together

information they've learned. This leads

to what is often called a hallucination.

AI confidently stating something that

sounds plausible but is actually

incorrect. Unlike search engines that

simply retrieve existing

documents, LLMs generate responses based

on statistical patterns, sometimes

producing

hallucinations. Imagine a friend who

tells a story with absolute confidence

only to have the details completely

wrong. AI can sometimes be like that.

Another important constraint is the

context window we mentioned earlier. As

a reminder, that's the amount of

information an AI can process at one

time. Every LLM has a maximum limit to

how much information it can consider

during a single interaction. If this

limit is exceeded, the AI won't be able

to remember information that falls

outside the window, usually on a first

in first out basis. Depending on the

size of the model, this can limit its

ability to process large documents or

remember the entire conversation.

Furthermore, unlike traditional software

that produces identical outputs given

the same inputs, LLM are somewhat

unpredictable by default, also known as

non-deterministic. Ask the same question

twice and you might get slightly

different responses each time. This

variability stems from the nature of how

these models generate text. They're

making probabilistic decisions about

what text should come next based on

patterns in their training data and

certain settings that developers can

tweak. This creative variability can be

great for brainstorming and generating

diverse ideas, but requires awareness

when consistency or accuracy are

critical. Some LLM interfaces also offer

settings to control this randomness when

needed. This setting is often referred

to as temperature. Additionally, while

these models are improving rapidly,

they've historically shown limitations

with complex reasoning tasks,

particularly with mathematical or

logical problems requiring multiple

steps. The good news is that newer

reasoning or extended thinking models

specifically designed to think stepby

step are showing strong progress in

these areas. And finally, while models

like Claude can now access external

tools, they may still lack access to

specific data sources or specialized

tools that would be needed for certain

tasks. It's like having a brilliant

colleague who can't access your

company's internal database. Their

ability to help will be limited no

matter how smart they are. If a model

doesn't have access to a piece of data

or tool that is needed to answer a

question, then it should not come as a

surprise that it won't be able to help

answer the question. The field of

generative AI is rapidly evolving.

Researchers are working to address

current limitations through techniques

like retrieval augmented generation

which connects models to external

knowledge and data sources as well as

expanding their ability to use tools and

improving their reasoning capabilities.

That said, some limitations will likely

remain for the foreseeable future, even

if we don't know exactly what those

limitations will be. Understanding what

AI can or cannot do is essential for AI

fluency and helps you determine when and

how to best incorporate these systems

effectively into your work and daily

life. The most effective applications

will leverage the complimentary

strengths of humans and AI. We bring

critical thinking, judgment, creativity,

and ethical oversight that AI may

struggle to replicate. While AI offers

speed, scale, pattern recognition, and

the ability to process vast amounts of

information. These complimentary

strengths will evolve as the technology

evolves. That's why continued learning

and experimentation are so valuable.

They help you stay a breast of these

changes and discover new possibilities.

In these exercises across this course,

you'll have a chance to explore these

concepts firsthand through conversations

with Claude. This direct experience will

help you develop an intuitive feel for

what generative AI can do, can't do, and

how best to work with it.


