In this video, we'll examine the

diligence competency from the AI fluency

framework. Remember that AI fluency

means working with AI effectively,

efficiently, ethically, and safely.

While the other three competencies

primarily address effectiveness and

efficiency, diligence focuses mostly on

the ethical and safety aspects that are

just as crucial for successful AI

collaboration. At its heart, diligence

is about taking responsibility for your

AI interactions. It's the dimension of

AI fluency that ensures your use of AI

systems is not only productive but also

rigorous, transparent, and accountable.

Unlike the other competencies that

primarily focus on getting results,

diligence asks us to consider broader

questions that are nevertheless critical

to AI collaboration, particularly in

professional environments, such as what

are the implications of working with

this AI? Who might be affected by what

is created or by the collaboration

itself or by any missed

inaccuracies? Who has access to the data

used to produce this output? How do I

ensure that my interaction and the

outcome aligns with ethical standards

and

values? Think about it like driving a

car. We don't just focus on getting from

point A to point B efficiently. We also

consider safety, follow traffic rules,

and remain aware of how our driving

affects others on the road. Similarly,

diligence recognizes that AI systems and

our interactions with them don't exist

in a vacuum. Working with AI responsibly

requires awareness of broader contexts

and their implications. Diligence begins

with becoming more critically thoughtful

about which AI systems we work with, how

we work with them, and the impacts that

come from those collaborations. We

should seek answers to questions like,

how is this system trained and built?

What data was used? Who owns the data

I'm inputting right now? Who may have

access to it once it's shared? How am I

protecting the privacy and security of

myself and others? What other impacts

does this system

have? How does this interaction align

with my personal and professional values

or with my organization's

policies? For example, before sharing

sensitive company information with an AI

assistant, it's important to first check

whether the service has appropriate data

protection policies in place or if your

organization permits such

sharing. We call this type of diligence

creation diligence. It is your ability

to be critical and intentional about

which AI systems you choose to work with

and how you work with

them. Different settings, personal,

academic, creative, and professional may

have different expectations of

disclosure about AI

interaction. However, the responsibility

is on each of us to understand and meet

these

expectations. Ask yourself, who needs to

know about AI's role in this work? How

and when should I communicate this? What

level of detail makes sense to

share? Meeting expectations for

transparency, in other words, being

forthright and honest, isn't just about

following rules and regulations. It's

about maintaining trust and respect in

your

relationships. It acknowledges that

people have the right to know when AI

has played a significant role in content

creation or in decisions that affect

them. For instance, if you used AI to

help draft a team proposal, letting your

colleagues know which parts were AI

assisted allows for a more honest

collaboration and keeps everyone on the

same page. We call this transparency

diligence. It's the ability to be open

and accurate about AI interaction with

everyone who needs to know. As we

discussed before, AI systems can make

mistakes. When you share AI generated

content with the world, you not the AI

are ultimately responsible for its

accuracy and

appropriateness. This means verifying

facts, checking for biases, ensuring

accuracy and usage rights, and other

checks needed so that you can stand

behind what you

share. Consider a journalist who uses AI

to help draft an article. Before

publishing, they would need to verify

every fact and source. Ensure that the

final piece meets every journalistic

standard, the same standards that would

apply had they written it entirely

themselves. We call this deployment

diligence. It's the ability to take

informed responsibility for the outputs

that you use or share after they've been

created with AI assistance. Navigating

these diligence considerations isn't

always straightforward.

Different contexts and stakeholders may

have different expectations and

standards. So it helps to develop

personal guidelines for working with AI

that align with your own ethics and

values. And in professional contexts,

familiarize yourself with organizational

policies and industry

standards. And remember that the legal

and regulatory frameworks around AI are

still emerging and will continue to

evolve.

Staying informed is an important part of

diligence. To

recap, creation, transparency, and

deployment diligence work together to

form the complete diligence competency.

By developing your capacity for

diligence, you ensure that your AI use

is not only effective and efficient, but

also ethical and safe. Diligence reminds

us that our interaction with AI comes

with

responsibilities. To be thoughtful about

the systems we choose and about how we

work with them, to be honest about AI's

role in our work, and ultimately to be

accountable for what we create when

working with

AI. We all want AI that is fair and safe

and of benefit to our society. Our own

behaviors play a key role in making this

happen.


