In this video, we'll dig deeper into the

AI fluency competency of

description. AI fluency means working

with an AI effectively, efficiently,

ethically, and safely. Description is

about communicating with AI, which is

the core of most human AI interaction.

Description goes far beyond just writing

clever prompts. It's about communicating

with the AI to explain tasks, ask

questions, provide context, and

otherwise guide the interaction. It's

about being able to steer a conversation

that is going wrong. It's about guiding

an AI's thought process or logical

reasoning. And it's about building a

kind of thinking environment where both

you and the AI can each do your best

work.

Think of it as building a bridge between

your intentions and the AI's

capabilities. The quality of AI outputs

often depend on how clearly you describe

what you want. It's like the difference

between asking someone to make dinner

versus providing a detailed recipe with

ingredients and cooking instructions. AI

can't read your mind. Instead of

assuming the AI knows what you're

looking for, you need to explain every

relevant detail. What is the context for

this work? What exactly are you looking

for the AI to do? What format should the

output take? Who is the audience and

what style is appropriate? Don't make AI

guess what you're thinking. Set explicit

requirements and give the AI the

information it needs to deliver what

you're actually looking for. We call

this first concept product description.

The ability to clearly define what you

want the AI to create or provide.

Sometimes specifying how an AI should

tackle a job is as or even more

important than specifying the end goal.

Just as you might prefer that a

colleague tackle a problem using your

specific method, you can guide how an AI

works through your request. You can and

should give the AI helpful guidance to

help it accomplish your desired goal.

There are different ways to approach

this. You might provide general guidance

like a manual, step-by-step instructions

like a cookbook, or even a demonstration

through examples. Here's how I'd do it.

Think about it this way. The AI already

has extensive training, but you're

providing additional context specific to

your unique

situation. Are there specific data you

want the AI to draw on? Are there

specific issues it should be addressing

or in a particular order? Is there a

particular style of analysis you need or

maybe a specific workflow or technique

you wanted to use? Taking time to

explain these elements makes a

tremendous

difference. We call this second concept

process description. The ability to

guide how the AI assistant approaches

your

request. If you take one thing from this

course, it should be this. AI tools are

not databases or vending machines. They

are interactive systems that can behave

differently in different contexts much

like people might. You need to explain

how you want the AI to behave to get the

best

results. When you next sit down with AI,

think first, what kind of thinking

partner do you need right now? Are you

narrowing down towards a specific answer

or trying to explore multiple

possibilities? Do you want the AI to

challenge your assumptions or simply

follow your lead? to provide expensive

detail or keep things concise to explain

why it's answering in a certain way or

just give you the answer. We call this

third concept performance description.

The ability to define the behavioral

aspects of an AI

interaction. You should now have a

better sense of how product description,

process description, and performance

description combine to form the

description competency. When you develop

your capacity for description, you

transform AI from generic assistants

into finely tuned thinking partners that

can truly meet your needs.


