In this video, we're going to take a

closer look at the delegation

competency. Remember that AI fluency is

about working with AI in ways that are

effective, efficient, ethical, and safe.

Delegation is primarily focused on the

first two of these. Helping you work

effectively and efficiently with AI

assistance. At its core, delegation is

about deciding what work is to be done,

what work you should do yourself, and

what work might be better suited to AI.

That might sound simple, but it's

surprisingly nuanced. Effective

delegation requires understanding both

what you're trying to accomplish and

what you and AI can each realistically

do. It's about breaking down complex

work into manageable pieces and making

strategic decisions about who handles

which part, whether through automation,

augmentation, or

agency. Here's something that might

surprise you.

The cornerstone of good delegation isn't

actually about AI at all. It's about

your own expertise and your own

understanding of what you're trying to

accomplish. Before involving AI in any

project, take a moment to answer some

important

questions. What exactly are you trying

to accomplish? What are you trying to

create or solve? What is your vision or

key project goals? What does success

look like to you?

and ask yourself what kind of thinking

and work is needed to get there. Are

there areas that are simple but

timeconuming? Areas of uncertainty where

you could use a trusted thinking

partner? Areas of ignorance where what

you need is more data or areas requiring

critical judgment. Every project and

every domain is different. We can't make

you an expert in your problem space. But

we can say that without a clear

understanding of your goals and the work

involved, even the most advanced AI

won't get you where you need to go.

You'll struggle to effectively work with

AI assistants, evaluate their outputs,

or know when human intervention is

necessary. The most effective AI

collaborators are experts in their

fields first and AI delegators second.

We call this first concept problem

awareness. the ability to clearly define

your goals and understand what work is

needed before bringing AI into the

picture. Beyond understanding your

problem, you also need a working

knowledge of the AI

landscape. Different AI systems offer

vastly different capabilities and this

field evolves almost daily. Effective

delegation isn't about finding one

perfect system. It's about understanding

the unique strengths and limitations of

the various options available to you.

Have you investigated which models

perform best for the kind of work you

have in mind? Do you know which AI

systems prioritize speed over depth or

accuracy over

creativity? This course includes several

technical sections that will help you

build this knowledge, but the landscape

moves quickly. The best approach is

hands-on. Experiment with different AI

systems as often as you can and develop

your own insights based on personal

experience. We call this second concept

platform awareness. A working knowledge

of available AI systems and their

specific capabilities and

limitations. Once you understand both

your problem and the available AI

assistance, the real art of delegation

emerges. thoughtfully distributing work

between human and artificial

intelligence to leverage the unique

strengths of each. Ask

yourself which specific parts of your

workflow would benefit from

automation or where would an

augmentation approach create more value

than either working alone or fully

automating? Are there critical judgment

areas that should remain exclusively

human and shouldn't be delegated at all?

What routine interactions can AI agents

handle on your behalf? With a clear

understanding of both your problem and

available AI systems, you can make

informed decisions about which aspects

of work should be automated by AI or

completed through human AI

collaboration or reserved exclusively

for human execution or handled by AI

agents acting on your behalf. We call

this third concept task delegation. The

strategic process of dividing work

between humans and

AI. To recap, delegation involves three

key elements. Problem awareness,

understanding your goals and the problem

to be solved. Platform awareness,

understanding AI capabilities and

limitations. And task delegation,

strategically dividing the work.

This competency highlights something

important. Effective AI collaboration

isn't about handing over the wheel and

calling it a day. It's about making

thoughtful choices and delegating work

that leverages the unique strengths of

both human and artificial intelligence.


