Teaching the AI Fluency Framework Lesson 3 Video Transcripts
© 2025 Rick Dakan, Joseph Feller, and Anthropic. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/ 


Lesson 3, Video 1: 
AI’s Impact and Your Discipline
We've explored how to teach and to assess AI Fluency. Now let's take a step back to get a better understanding of something that’s on all our minds: how is AI changing what we teach, and what do we do about it?
This video examines how AI disrupts our specific disciplines and how we might respond. The next video will explore embedding your subject expertise into the 4Ds. Together, they will help you effectively integrate AI Fluency with your broader curriculum while staying true to what matters in your field.
[ "Disciplinary knowledge is the foundation for unprecedented achievement"]
AI fluency isn't about automating away our expertise. It's about amplifying what we know and do best by augmenting our capabilities, knowledge, insights, and judgement through thoughtful partnership. Our disciplinary knowledge doesn't become obsolete—it becomes the foundation for unprecedented achievement.
This is the message we must embody and help our students understand.
Let’s consider for a moment what our graduates will face:
What gets automated? Which routine tasks in their future careers are likely to be automated by AI? And what does that mean for what we teach today and how?
Next, where’s the partnership potential? Where will human-AI collaboration be most impactful? These may become priority areas for developing both domain expertise and AI fluency together.
Lastly, who’s in charge? When AI does work independently in their field, how do students manage and remain accountable for what it does, and how can we prepare them for this now?
AI creates disruption, both positive and negative, in every discipline, across our  curricula, our pedagogy, and our assessment practices. But the disruption isn’t uniform. For example, maybe your curriculum stays stable while your assessments transform. Or, your pedagogy might evolve while your core curriculum stays constant. Some disruptions are opportunities to be leveraged, others are problems to solve. Understanding which is which is where your expertise comes in. Let’s dig a little deeper.


Your response to AI disruption builds on three types of expertise you already have:
First, your Disciplinary Expertise: You understand not just your field's content but its core values, methods, and ways of thinking. You know which skills are foundational versus peripheral, which concepts unlock future learning, and what makes someone truly fluent in your discipline.
You also have your Pedagogical Expertise: You know where students in your field typically struggle, achieve breakthroughs, and develop mastery. You understand the emotional journey of learning your subject—where students resist, where they get excited, where they need support.
You also have your Assessment Expertise: You know how to recognize genuine understanding when you see it. You can design evaluations that reveal deep learning, whether AI is involved or not.
Now to AI’s impact on our work. Let’s start with curriculum: 
AI doesn't replace disciplinary knowledge but it does challenge us to reconsider what we teach, when, how, and why. It forces us to ask hard questions: what does domain mastery mean in an AI context? How do we help students develop the judgment, creativity, and deep personal understanding to recognize when AI generates quality content or is genuinely helpful to them? 
The fundamentals stay fundamentals, but students will question why they need this knowledge at all. They might ask, "Why learn research methods when AI can search for me?" "Why study writing when AI generates text?" We need compelling, discipline specific answers that connect deep learning to enhanced capability and students' own goals.
Take time to work with your colleagues to deeply assess AI’s impact on your curriculum: 
Identify what in your discipline AI systems are capable of automating
Determine which foundational concepts become more or less important when AI handles routine tasks
Identify how AI augmentation changes and can improve best practices in your discipline
Determine which foundational concepts become more or less important with the involvement of AI, including how to help students direct AI agents effectively
AI will also transform how we teach and how our students learn. Personalized tutoring at scale, interactive simulations, immediate feedback—things we dreamed about just a few years ago as tools to support student learning are suddenly possible. AI-based EdTech applications challenge our assumptions about classroom dynamics, homework, and the very nature of teaching relationships. But, as we all know, not all AI “enhancement” actually enhances learning. Some AI systems genuinely help students learn; others just short-circuit it. The key is understanding which is which in your specific context.
Accordingly, in your discipline, you need to define how AI either enhances or diminishes different types of learning, however it's used. Together with your peers, it will be important to figure out:
How AI systems can enable learning and teaching in your discipline. 
How AI systems can inhibit learning and teaching in your discipline.
For both of these, consider which teacher and student collaborations with AI best leverage AI’s potential as an educational assistant. We encourage you to consider AI as an interactive environment or partner for learning activities
Finally, determine which pedagogical approaches best leverage AI potential for your specific teaching practice, and which we should actively avoid or discourage. Is avoiding it even feasible, or are we able to lean into how students will seek out AI assistance regardless and better teach them to work more effectively with AI?
Perhaps most urgently, AI challenges how we measure learning. When students can generate essays in seconds, what are we actually assessing? How do we create evaluations that honor individual growth, creativity, and problem solving? 
We need to consider how to authentically assess both AI-assisted and human-only performances of understanding and mastery. And hopefully, we emerge with a clearer understanding of what skills are core to mastery in our fields, with richer measurement methodology that may even involve AI in the assessment process. Again, your expertise here is essential. You know what genuine understanding looks like in your field. 
This is the biggest, most challenging disruption AI creates for educators. These are difficult but vital tasks for effectively building on your expertise to create new assessments: 
Identify what an authentic demonstration of learning looks like in AI-assisted work
Determine how to create assignments that students can’t shortcut with AI tools. Is there a different kind of assessment that can demonstrate even deeper understanding when students work with AI to accomplish it?
Identify how assessments can value process and growth, not just products
Determine where AI collaboration enhances versus undermines learning objectives. How can we adapt to lean into the knowledge that students will likely turn to AI regardless, and perhaps pivot to assessing their skills in critically thinking and working with AI, and not without it?
We know, all of that is easier said than done. We encourage you to talk to your students and work with your colleagues and institutions to create assessment strategies that work for your specific institution and needs. 
The exercises and handouts included in this lesson provide guided surveys to map AI's impacts in your discipline and design thoughtful responses that honor both innovation and core values.


In every discipline, humans bring irreplaceable capabilities to bear: domain expertise, real world context, judgment in ambiguous and messy situations, creative problem-solving, ethical reasoning, and relationship building. Our job is to ensure that AI amplifies these capabilities.
This AI fluency expertise works both ways. The deeper your subject matter expertise, the better you can identify meaningful AI applications. The more fluently you work with AI, the further you can push your discipline's boundaries.
Here are three things to keep in mind as you consider AI’s effect on your field: 
AI impacts our students’ futures and our teaching (in both exciting and concerning ways)
Responding effectively requires leaning into the critical assessment of the technology, from developing AI fluency via practice to collaborating with colleagues on building an intentional strategy around AI for your specific context.
AI Fluency begins and ends with your expertise, and you are well positioned to drive change for the better for your institution and for your students’ futures in terms of how they work with AI.

